Physics, as the science of the structure and dynamics of the physical world, is illequipped to tackle questions of human experience, which necessarily limits its contribution. However, physics is well suited to making careful, precise observations, and making
these observations in as close to an objective sense as is possible. It is my hope that the
careful observations of physics may be used as ‘fuel’ for the ongoing debate over the
nature of time.3
To make progress in this thesis though, I will have to leave behind these fascinating
questions of time perception and adopt the pragmatic physical view of time. That is, time
considered as a numerical parameter that indicates the ordering of events relative to those
of a ‘reference’ dynamical system4
that are assumed to be periodic. In this framework,
the question of the direction of time is approached using the time-reversal transformation
(T-transformation) which changes the sign of the time parameter, t → −t. Our task is to
investigate the symmetry of the physical world under this T-transformation.
It doesn’t take a very sophisticated experiment to discover that the physical world is
manifestly asymmetric under the T-transformation — dropping a teapot will do. This
kind of T-symmetry violation, an ‘entropic’ asymmetry, is summed up physically by the
Second Law of Thermodynamics. Through the work of Maxwell, Boltzmann, Gibbs and
Lochschmidt in the late 19th century, we now know entropic asymmetry to be a probabilistic feature of systems with a large number of components and highly ordered initial
states. The observable universe is in a rather ‘unlikely’ state very far from equilibrium,
and continually moves towards the more probable equilibrium state.5
There is another, perhaps more fundamental, question concerning the universe’s Tsymmetry. Can we perform an experiment on a system with just one component, perhaps
a supposedly indivisible component like an electron, that reveals a T-asymmetry of the
universe ? In terms of an appealing picture: it’s clear we can tell whether a movie of
a teapot being smashed is being played forward or backward, can we do the same for a
‘movie’ of a single electron ? It is performing just this sort of experiment that I will focus
on in this thesis.
It is often said that observing T-asymmetry in such a fundamental system is evidence
of the ‘laws of physics’ being T-asymmetric. I think caution should be exercised in taking
this inferential step. The problem is the usual one, that observation of an asymmetry in
the behaviour of a system can be attributed to either an asymmetry in the laws governing